When building clustering models,
you should be aware of
the impact of predetermined
bias in certain types of data.
Predetermined biased is when
a historical data set shows certain
results because of how
the business was run
over the time that
the data was collected.
And because of that,
an inherent bias may be present and
affect how the objects are clustered.
Think about it.
Naturally, a store can only sell
whatever product it has allocated.
If product category sales is used as
part of the data to determine clusters,
stores could be forced into certain
segments because they were either given
or not given a specific
product category.
For example, pretend a particular store
has not sold high end merchandise,
because prior systems never allocated
that merchandise to the store.
Any clustering method that uses
historical product sales as data
will bias against putting this store
in a segment that would receive
high end merchandise.
This could happen even though the
demographics for the area, around that
store, would indicate a good potential
for selling high end merchandise.
When you think this might be the case,
it might make sense to rely more
on demographic and social data for
the initial pass of
determining the segments.
Leave out the historical sales data
from the first clustering analyses and
see how the segments form.
Then you compare the historical
category sales for
each of the stores within
the same segments.
If there's a significant difference,
you would want to try to
determine what the cause could be.
At that point, you might discover that
it's because that category has not been
fully allocated to the under
performing stores.
And if it's consistent across
the segments, you might actually want to
reconsider how much you rely
on the historical data for
your clustering solution.
This situation can occur for
a number of reasons.
Typically, the bias is
introduced by a process
based on a previously
inaccurate allocation method.
Or because a category manager
had made a decision for
some reason to just not sell
certain products in certain stores.
>From my experience,
convincing that product manager
to change how they look
at product allocation for
these stores becomes much easier
when they see the rationale
behind a segmentation that is based on
actual demographic and social data.
Suggesting an approach to test
the validity of the new segmentation,
by only changing the allocation in small
set of the under performing stores,
can help make the transition
more acceptable.
You can then check if sales patterns
change over a set period of time.
This way, the business risk is not as
great, but you provide the opportunity
for better revenue if
the segmentation is confirmed.
You could use the method
known as AB testing for
this kind of process,
which was taught in a separate course.